---
path: "/drafts/societal-scapegoating"
date: 2020-08-26 
title: "Societal Scapegoating"
description: "the widespread epidemic of blaming everyone else"
component: "essayLayout"
---

Recently, I finished reading the award-winning sci-fi trilogy *The Three-Body Problem* by Liu Cixin. Though I enjoyed [nearly everything](/reviews/the-three-body-problem) the books had to offer, there was a particular theme/pattern that caught my attention: the attribution of blame. In a story with such extreme situations (alien invasion, the elimination of dimensions etc), it was interesting to read about society's theoretical reactions and decisions in relation to it all. Despite it being purely fictional however, I did find myself catching similarities between that world and our own modern one. Which leads me to here, writing a paper in an attempt to better understand society and its obsession with finding a scapegoat.

*The Three-Body Problem* is a trilogy of epic proportions. The entire universe serves as the setting and deicisons made by the characters will oftentimes impact countless individuals and sometimes entire civilizations. And as with anything with consequences, people will look for someone to blame when things go wrong. There are a few examples from the books that stand out to me. The first one being Luo Ji, one of the Wallfacers and the first swordholder. Luo Ji's character undergoes many
different transformations in the eyes of the public. He initially is seen as a waste of resources, being the only Wallfacer who doesn't seem to have any outstanding external achievements or qualifications. The other three Wallfacers can barely hide their distain for him when they speak of their own plans and when he is the last Wallfacer left, Secretary General Say tells him that "under normal circumstances, a man like [him] would never be tasked with such an important duty" and that the UN is "well aware of the fact that [he doesn't] care about the fate of the human race" (Liu, *The Dark Forest*). Thus, his initial public image is an incredibly poor one. During this time, he sets his Wallfacer plan, the spell on a distant planet, in motion. As it does not appear to yield any meaningful results on the surface and a Trisolarian victory seems inevitable, socity piles onto the idea that Luo Ji is the reason everything went wrong. That he let them down even though he had never wanted to be a Wallfacer in the first place. This is one of the first instances where we see someone become a scapegoat due to something that was almost completely out of their control. Luo Ji initially had no interest in being a Wallfacer, trying to turn down the position. The responsibility was forced upon him and so was all of the blame. As the reader quickly finds out however, Luo Ji's spell was not useless. Instead what he discovered was "the dark forest" theory. The idea that space is like a dark forest, in which no one can risk giving out information as to their exact location in the case that a more advanced civilization decides to attack. His discovery of this theory is what leads to the "deterrence era", a temporary time of peace between the Trisolarians and humans as the former are unwilling to risk being attacked by a third-party. But despite being the sole reason this period of peace exists, Luo Ji is still turned against for other reasons. He remains as the Swordholder and people "respect" him enough to not immediately disturb him, but there are talks amongst the rest of the world over whether he committed munidicide when he destroyed that intial planet with his spell. When we take a look at the scapegoating of Cheng Xin, we will see the full irony of society. 

As we can see in nearly every scene, society is always apt to latch onto the idea of one person or group being responsible for the destruction of everything. It's much easier to think in this way than to acknowledge the true complexities of the situation. The other, even more apparent case is the one of Cheng Xin. She begins as an aerospace engineer and eventually becomes the second Swordholder. In a similar fashion to Luo Ji, her path to becoming the Swordholder was heavily impacted by society as a whole. After Luo Ji's term as the swordholder ends after many, many years, the world comes together to select a new one. Public opinion had shifted over the years and their subsequent choice reflected that. During Luo Ji's stint as the Swordholder, humanity had enjoyed an era not unlike peace with the Trisolarians. In the trilogy, this causes society to look for a new Swordholder who is different from Luo Ji; to choose someone who is not as staunch and hard-nosed against relations with their alien neighbours. And so they optimistically chose Cheng Xin, who personifies all the traits humanity believes are best suited in that time- a character who is warm, nurturing, and motherly (after all, she was the other female Swordholder candidate). Ironically, her character is exactly what causes the public to turn on. Immediately after she becomes the effective Swordholder, the Trisolarians launch their attack, and true to her nature, Cheng Xin found herself unable to activate the universal broadcast system. Mirroring Luo Ji's public image, she becomes an outcast and people deride her for condemning humanity to the mercy of the Trisolarians. 

This pattern of societal scapegoating is one that happens many, many more times in the books, and its one that closely mirrors the reality of our world. There is a phenomena that is closely related to this: "basking in reflected glory" and "cutting off reflected failure". It is one most easily studied amidst sports fans and they way they speak about their teams. The basic premise is this: people seek to associate themselves with success, and to distance themselves from failure




<!-- --- -->
<!-- path: "/essays/moral-ambiguity" -->
<!-- date: 2020-08-26 -->
<!-- title: "Moral Ambiguity" -->
<!-- description: "and why we love it so much" -->
<!-- --- -->

<!-- Recently, I finished reading the sci-fi trilogy *The Three-Body Problem*. I thoroughly enjoyed the entire thing, but there was an aspect that I particularly liked: the moral ambiguity of many of the characters throughout the books. But why? What is it about moral ambiguity that makes me enjoy reading about it? Of course, it's not just me. The popularity of morally ambiguous characters has been a documented cultural phenomenon for quite a while. This is especially present on television and -->
<!-- in cinema where anti-heros litter the scene. --> 

<!-- In a survey conducted by Morning Consult[^1] in the context of *Joker*'s release in 2019, audiences appeared to be nearly equally split between wanting a clear definition of right and wrong and not. What's more interesting is the trend between the different age groups however. There is a consistent trend of younger audiences wanting more moral ambiguity. --> 

<!-- In general, book characters tend to play a key component in the enjoyment of a reader. After all, it is their choices that drive the plot and narrative forward. As such, if readers are to truly become invested in the story, they also tend to develop strong attachments to the characters themselves, forming judgements and evaluations of them and their actions. In the case of morally ambiguous characters, these feelings towards them may often be hard to parse. This is when moral disengagement comes in. Moral disengagement is defined as "the process by which an individual convinces him/herself that ethical standards do not apply to him/herself within a particular situation or context"[^2]. In the case of the book characters, the readers would be using moral disengagement in order to justify morally ambiguous or even typically morally reprehensible behaviour exhibited by the individual. --> 

<!-- For me, the cahracter that most exmplified these examples in *The Three-Body Problem* was Cheng Xin. She makes two of what most people would consider fatal mistakes in the books, the first one being when she decided to not initiate broadcast system after being chosen as the Swordholder and the second being when she ordered Wade to cease his development on light-speed spacecraft. In both cases, the morality of the situation is unclear. The universal broardcast supposedly assures the mutual -->
<!-- destruction of both humans and Trisolarians but when faced with the choise of pressing it, Cheng Xin throws the chance away and leaves all humans at the mercy of the Trisolarians. Her decisions are purely based on her own principles, which appear to be that life, regardless of who that life belongs to, is important. --> 


<!-- </br> -->

<!-- [^1]: https://morningconsult.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/191024_crosstabs_JOKER_Adults_v2_EM.pdf -->
<!-- [^2]: http://www.psychologyconcepts.com/moral-disengagement/ -->
